Well, before we jump into token abilities, we need to take a step back and think of just
user authorization in general, because there's so much more to user authorization than just
can a user do something.
For example, let's take a look at a ticket.
This is a ticket with an ID of 20, and the author has an ID of 1.
So in a typical application, we would want to limit who can edit this ticket based upon
a few factors.
First of all, is it the author?
And second of all, is it a manager or an admin?
And that's it.
No one else should be able to edit this ticket.
So it's more than just can a user do something.
It's can a user do something for a particular resource?
So then the question becomes, how do we start to implement that?
Because we could do all of those checks inside of our controller.
We could check the token ability using a token can method.
And then we could say that the ability could be ticket update or something like that.
But then we also need to make sure that the user is the same user that created that ticket.
And then if we had any other criteria, we could have that here.
But you know, of course, one of the things that I've wanted to do is keep our controllers
as lean as possible.
So the more criteria we have, the more this is going to grow.
And I don't want to do that.
So then the question becomes, you know, once again, how do we implement this?
And I want to keep all of these things in one place because I don't want to have to
go to one file to see, okay, is the user authorized here and then go to another file for some
other rules.
I just want one place.
So one thing that we could use is a policy because that ties into the authorize method
so that we could specify an ability and then the model that we wanted to check.
And then the policy would determine whether or not the user was authorized to edit that
ticket.
And if they weren't, it would throw an authorization exception so that we could catch that and
then return a payload that basically said you are not authorized to update that resource.
And that would be a 401.
So I like this approach.
So let's start implementing that.
We can make a policy using Artisan, make policy.
And we need to version this because different versions might have different policy requirements.
So we will create that policy and then we need to register the policy.
And we would do that inside of the auth service provider.
There is this policies array to where we would map a policy to a model class.
So for our ticket model, we want to use the ticket policy that we just created.
Now hopefully this is throwing off some red flags because we have just bound this ticket
policy, this version one ticket policy to our ticket model.
And there's nothing that says we can't come in here and say, okay, we have a V2 that we
also want to use and we can do that just fine.
And that's perfectly fine, but this is going to throw a wrench in our plans because the
authorized method doesn't really know which policy version that we want to use.
Well we could tell it that.
Whenever we call the authorized method, we could pass an array as the second argument
where we can specify the ticket and then the policy that we wanted to use.
So here we could say ticket policy for V1.
But I don't want to do that because that means every time we call the authorized method,
we would have to do the same thing.
And I like the simplicity of just passing the ability and the model and that's it.
So what if we did something like this?
We would have a method called isAble.
And for all intents and purposes, this is going to be exactly the same as calling the
authorized method, but it's going to be specialized for our case.
So that's for our V1 ticket controller, it would use the V1 ticket policy.
And then we would use the same concept for our author's controller.
So for our V1 author's controller, we would have a V1 author policy.
So then we just have to implement this thing.
And I think, you know, since we have this base API controller, let's just write that
public isAble method here to where we have the ability and then we have the target model.
But then we also need this to be as flexible as possible because we need to be able to
specify the policy class that we want to use.
So let's say that we'll have a protected, we'll just call it policy class.
So that inside of this isAble, we will simply return this authorize, we'll pass in the ability.
But then for the second argument, we would use that syntax that I briefly showed you
before to where we pass in an array that has the target model and then the policy class.
So that means inside of our ticket controller, we would need to specify that policy class.
So we'll have protected policy class is equal to the ticket policy class.
So that inside of our update method, all we have to do is pass in update, pass in ticket.
If the user is authorized to update that ticket, then everything should work, otherwise it
should fail.
So let's try this, first of all, with this ticket with an ID of 20 because we are signed
in with the user with an ID of one.
So let's modify our body, although we need to go to the patch request, don't we?
So the ticket is already canceled.
Let's say that we want to complete that.
So we will send that request, hopefully, well, we are not authorized.
That's not what I intended to see.
I intended to see this working.
So let me make sure everything is OK.
We are returning this authorize.
We are specifying the ability target model and this policy class.
We didn't implement the policy.
We created it.
Got ahead of myself.
OK, so inside of our ticket policy class, which we've just now opened, we didn't even
open it.
Isn't that fun?
So what we can do is create a new method that matches the ability that we are checking for.
So in this case, it would be update.
And here we get two things.
We get the user, that is the user that is currently signed in, that is trying to update
in this particular case.
And then we have the ticket that we are wanting to work with.
My gosh, I can't believe I did that.
So in this case, our check is going to be very simple.
We want to see if the user ID is equal to the ticket user ID.
Now it'll work.
We can go back to Postman, we can send that request, and we can see that, sure enough,
it worked.
We updated that status to see.
But let's try in the case of a ticket that does not belong to our user.
And the ticket with an ID of 101 does not.
In fact, I don't even remember what user we assigned to that.
So let's do a GET request to see what that user is.
And it's a user with an ID of 2.
So definitely, this is not going to work.
And thankfully, we are getting the results that we expected.
So now that we have this policy set up, we can use this for all of our criteria.
So that in the next episode, we will assign a token ability and check for the token ability.